---
tags: burning-man personal
orig_url: https://www.facebook.com/paul.fenwick/posts/10151660436989611
---
I'm back from Burning Man. After almost two weeks in the desert it feels weird
to have things like electricity, running water, and fresh food. The whole thing
is a pretty incredible experience; the effort required to participate in
Burning Man is huge; 20+ hour car trips, the requirement to pack in and out
*everything* you'll need (food, water, shelter, clothing, tools), and then
living in one of the most driest, hottest, and inhospitable places on earth.
For the final two days I had perhaps 2 hours sleep per "night", half of which
was on a thin, dusty rug, and the other half was awkwardly stuffed into a
car-seat that didn't recline.

<!--more-->

These are conditions where people should be absolutely miserable. But they're
not. Burning Man is an incredible explosion of human creativity and joy. I had
a finalist from MasterChef cook me an amazing meal, and insist that I return
for more. I had a girl stop by when I was giving out coffee, and spent the
morning listening to how her sister was fighting cancer; by the end she was
crying with joy because her sister was *winning* that fight. We shared the most
incredible hug, and celebrated the strength of the human spirit. I've been
immolated with a fireball while wearing a aluminum suit while dancing in front
of a huge crowd of people. I walked to the temple in the middle of my night,
wrote a huge note to mom on one of the walls, cried my eyes out for a couple of
hours, walked back to my tent through hellish, freezing duststorm, and then
watched the whole thing burn with a crowd of thousands of other grievers a few
days later. I watched one of the world's best scientists give talks on using
fungi to break down oil spills, remove radiation from soils, and treat cancer.
I rode on a huge boat blasting electronic music that sailed across the desert.
I stopped by dozens of people who were having a hard time to make sure they
were okay, and to help them if they weren't. I watched a group of
fire-swizzlers outside a sound camp with a sub-woofer so impressive it caused
the dust to lift from the ground. I cycled past a roller-disco filled with
smiling people grooving to Rick Astley. I fixed countless people's backs and
shoulders. I helped construct and deconstruct infrastructure, both for friends
and for strangers. I stood under an incredible steel disco-ball, studded with
lights, and entirely covered with toothbrushes. I danced to Rocky Horror songs
while wearing a labcoat and balancing a pancake. I moved building materials
across the desert by balancing them on my bicycle. I discussed spirituality,
ethics, neuroscience, feminism, statistics, and countless other topics with
friends and strangers alike. I made a guy named Van Allen extremely happy
because I commented that his parents must be scientists, and nobody ever gets
his name. I saw the sun rise while sitting on top of a piece of art and then
watched the most beautiful clouds drift across the sky. I slept in a ball-pit.
I saw friendships made. I saw friendships lost. I participated in one of the
most extraordinary events on earth.

Burning Man changes people. One thing I always find when returning is that
whatever problems I had when I left don't feel that hard any more. The
difficulties found back in the default world seem like very little compared to
the harshness of the playa.

I don't recommend Burning Man to everyone, but I can't imagine not going back
next year.

