---
tags: burning-man personal
orig_url: https://www.facebook.com/paul.fenwick/posts/10151661956799611
---

It's interesting to see my changes in perspective after #BurningMan. Living in
the desert wipes away the worries that exist in the default world. One's
worries about long-term things like money, household, relationships, and
redundancy in your cloud infrastructure are replaced with much more immediate
concerns: My tent is blowing away. I have to move 30kg of gear on foot. There
is no coffee. I am on fire.

<!--more-->

The stresses of the desert are often immediate, specific, and finite. This is
how stress is supposed to work; consequently I find the entire ordeal a very
*relaxing* one. I find myself no longer worried or anxious unless there is an
immediate, specific need requiring my attention.

Looking at my accumulated strata of to-do lists, I find myself thinking "this
isn't such a big deal", or "these things don't really matter", especially when
it come to things which I've gone without, and did not miss. The brain will
adapt itself so that you'll worry about whatever things exist in your present
experience. Changing your experiences can let you look at your stressors in an
entirely new light.

Unfortunately I know that these changes in my outlook are temporary, at some
point I'll go back to having a similar set of worries and concerns as I did
before the burn. But until then, I feel like a mental badass: unassailable and
calm. There is a long tradition of humans going on pilgrimages and through
hardship in order to gain enlightenment and peace; I feel I now have a small
insight into the nature of those journeys.

~ Paul
