---
title: "Obviously, they're a jerk"
tags: longpost cognitive-bias introspection fundamental-attribution-error personal ethics
---

People are so completely incomprehensible sometimes. We look at the actions of
others, and think "why would they do that?" and "what were they thinking?".
Often we explain their behaviour by ascribing them traits. Someone cuts you off
and runs a red light? They're obviously a jerk.

<!--more-->

What we so often forgetting is that inside everyone's head is a consistent
story. They're doing what they're doing because it makes sense to them at the
time. If the person who cut you off at the lights has someone bleeding out in
the back-seat and is speeding to the hospital, then their actions seem heroic,
not jerky. But to us, the outside observer, we come to the wrong conclusions
for their actions.

Unfortunately, we misattribute people's behaviour all the time, even when those
people are close to us. For me personally, October has been incredibly
stressful. My father's in hospital, I've spent weeks on divorce negotiations,
I've been travelling far more than has been comfortable, there's been tax,
housemates moving out, housemates moving in, conference talks to write, work
deadlines to meet, and my todo list is full to bursting. And that's just the
things I'm willing to talk about publicly.

I know for certain during this time that I've come across to some people as
unreliable, uncaring, unresponsive, or unfriendly. That's not been my intent,
and I've tried to explain as best where I can, but sometimes explanations are
not always possible. The best I can hope for is that others give me the benefit
of the doubt.

So, I have a request for you, and it has nothing to do with me. The next time
you think that someone's uncaring or rude, the next time you think someone's
unreliable or inconsistent; the next time you think someone must dislike you
because they're not responding to your communication; then please think for a
moment. That person has an internal story where their behaviour makes sense. If
their behaviour seems puzzling to you, it may well be because you don't know
that story. So please, give them the benefit of the doubt. They may not be as
big a jerk as you think.
