---
title: A hope for humanity
tags: longpost tech japan ethics laputa futurism
orig_url: https://www.facebook.com/paul.fenwick/posts/10151712120719611
---

It's fascinating how some feelings can hit you entirely out of the blue, when
you'd least expect them, but that's what happened yesterday to me in Japan.

I was exploring the local markets at Asasuka, and I'd found the Studio Ghibli
store. There were all the things you'd expect: towels, handbags, keyrings,
stickers, purses; nothing that I hadn't really seen before, and certainly
nothing that I thought would change how I feel.

<!--more-->

Except there was. In a display cabinet, at the back of the store, there was a
model of one of the robots from [Laputa: Castle in the Sky][laputa]. A light
layer of moss, bird's nest on its shoulder, holding a flower. And, as a
complete surprise to myself, I almost cried.

Laputa has long been one of my favourite films. I probably watched it a dozen
times while growing up. The imagery in it is striking, but the most moving part
for me was its portrayal of technology. The robots that tend Laputa are kind
and gentle; they are immortal caretakers and protectors of nature and humanity
alike.

Of course, when things start to go wrong, we discover the robots also have the
capacity for destruction. That's unfortunately true for technology in general;
almost anything can be weaponised. But ultimately, technology allows us to make
our lives better. We've never had such an amazing capacity to ease suffering,
cure disease, travel distances, communicate, share, explore and discover as we
have now.

Our understanding of modern science is still very much in its infancy. A
hundred years ago we were only just getting started with electricity, and the
results have been incredible. Right now, we're still just getting started with
microbiology and genetics. I think we have a future where we don't just cure
cancer, but a future where we *eliminate disease*.

In many ways, the robotic caretakers of Laputa symbolise my hopes for humanity.
Technology is already our caretaker; modern cities simply couldn't exist
without automation, and for someone with a pacemaker or insulin pump,
technology is a central part of simply being alive. I know that we're going to
get things wrong along the way—technology is already used for warfare and
oppression—but it's my most sincere hope that our relationship with technology
will allow us to become more compassionate, more creative, more inquisitive,
and more *human* than we've ever been before. There is a nurturing and caring
future for humanity, we just need to reach it.

It's very rare for me to ever purchase something as a memento of my travels,
but yesterday I did.

~ Paul 
