---
title: Impostor syndrome and depression
tags: impostor-syndrome depression personal
orig_url: https://www.facebook.com/paul.fenwick/posts/10151600213599611
---

You might have encountered the term [Impostor Syndrome][impostor-syndrome],
where people feel that they're somehow "faking it". This is common with
programmers, artists, public speakers, and I suspect anyone who is able to see
the faults in their own work, despite others judging that work on its merits.

If you've ever started a thought with "You may be impressed now, but if you
only knew I was just making it up/not doing it the right way/not really that
cool/lucky/had good timing/have no idea what I'm doing", then you may know what
impostor syndrome is like. If you've been feeling that way a lot—and I know
people with years of experience who still don't consider themselves "a *real*
programmer/artist/performer/badass"—then you might actually have impostor
syndrome.

<!--more-->

Impostor syndrome is problematic on many levels. It not only denies the value
of your own work, but it also invalidates others who appreciate your
accomplishments. It stops others from using you as a role model. It gets in the
way of everyone being able to multiply the good that you're doing in the world.
Denise Paolucci from Dreamwidth has a
[fantastic talk on Impostor Syndrome][impostor-denise] which I strongly
encourage you to watch.

And so this brings me to my admission for the day. For a while now I've been
experiencing a very odd form of impostor syndrome. Rather than not feeling like
a real programmer, I'm not feeling like a real *Paul Fenwick*.

There's a set of traits which both others and myself associate with my
personality. Curiosity, optimism, gregariousness, adventurousness, knowledge
transfer, wonderment, enthusiasm. While I'm sometimes praised for my skills and
accomplishments, what I find is that I'm often praised on my personality.

Except that I often feel I'm faking all that. Faking the enthusiasm. Faking the
adventurousness. Faking the curiosity. Personality *is* a skill, it's something
I've learnt, and I'm great at faking it.

I've not always felt this way. Go back a few years and that enthusiasm you saw
was absolutely 85% genuine. Now it feels like it's more 35% genuine. I'm
enthusiastic out of habit and expectation, because that's the character I play,
but it's not because of how I really feel¹.

If you're me, then this a fascinating position to be in. I don't want to say
"this is just how I am now", because those qualities that I'm "faking" are all
highly advantageous, and they're also qualities which are not really gone. Give
me the right group of people and I *am* enthusiastic. Give me the right
environment and I *am* inspired. But afterwards I have a tendency to go back to
levels of "meh", rather than baseline levels of "OMG".

I still have enjoyment, but I'm lacking *drive*. Goals feel a lot more
arbitrary and less exciting. I don't find myself *wanting* to do things as
much. And that's frustrating as all hell; I'm not out there doing great things.
I'm not bringing enjoyment and wonder to my friends. I'm not being as social as
I should be—interactions with others are a primary source of reward in my life.
There's a lot of good that I'm failing to do for myself or the world. I don't
feel guilty about this, but I'm definitely frustrated.

I've been thinking a lot as to the 'how' of this situation. A lot of my
dysfunctional periods are characterised by ruminating thoughts, and they
usually happen when I'm alone. When others are around I still often lack the
feeling of drive, but I'm less likely to ruminate, and I'm more likely to be
productive. Despite this, I still have a tendency to be more shy than I used to
be. Again, I feel like I'm making social engagements because it fits my
"character"; or because I'm exercising executive function to do something which
I know will be beneficial to me, even though I'm not feeling it at the time.

All this observation is great, but it only gains real value if I can strategise
improvements from it. Since I'm very much aware that people make a big
difference to how I'm feeling and thinking (and they always have), many of
these are social-oriented strategies.

Improvement number one is changing my *default socialisation*. If you've got
work colleagues, or a family, then very often those are the people you're going
to socialise with unless you're making efforts to actually avoid them. I'm
pleased to say that one of my BFFs is back in town, and this morning I received
a message asking "when can you move back in?" Having lived together in the
past, I know that this alone will do wonders for my baseline mental state.

The second is to improve my *novel socialisation*. I've been promising forever
to head north to Seattle, Bellingham, and Vancouver. I usually do very well
when I'm in high-travel mode, staying in each location for only a couple of
days each, and so my plan is to head north next week.

However there are things which I know I'm likely to be poor at, and would
definitely appreciate some help. Ones which immediately spring to mind include:

* Exercise. Without going fully neuro on you, some extra [BDNF][BDNF] isn't going to
hurt. If you're in Portland and having a work bike that I can borrow, that
would probably do wonders for raising my incidental exercise levels.

* Remembering things which I actually enjoy, but for which my motivation has
extinguished itself. If there's something you remember the both of us doing
which we really enjoyed, you should feel increased license to encourage the two
of us to go do that together.

The very hardest part, but one that I think will stand to provide many
benefits, is new mindware that includes functions for breaking rumination
cycles. I'm actually totally happy to receive suggestions here. If you have
your Cognitive Behavioural Therapy homework that you want to lend me, I'm down
with that. If you've got something which has worked for you, I'm happy to hear
it.

Thanks for reading. Thoughts, comments, and discussion quite welcome.

~ Paul

---

⁰ This post is tagged with depression not because I'm currently experiencing a
depressive episode, but because the lack of motivation and ruminating thoughts
feel like hangovers from my episode last year.

¹ Of course, my response to reduced enthusiasm was to go researching dopamine
and reward seeking behaviours as they relate to neuropsychology. If I had more
than 35% enthusiasm I'd have written an article on this by now. There's also a
cognitive bias known as rosy retrospection, so I probably view my past
enthusiasm as being greater than it really was.
